Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
21
Jul
BYDUNCAN PARSONS// COLLECTION, GALLERIES, LEARNING, SUPPORT US
Can You Help Us Build A WW2 Air-Raid Shelter?
How You Can Help Build a Second World War Air-Raid Shelter

At SOFO we tell stories of everyone affected by war in the county of Oxfordshire; from the soldier on the front line to ordinary families on the home front. Our small but dedicated team of staff and volunteers work hard to tell these stories of conflict and county in many different ways, including museum displays and learning sessions.

Our latest project aims to expand upon how our visitors can learn about conflict at the museum. Already installed at the museum is a model trench, which was built with the kind help of local Cadets back when we first opened in 2014. It's always popular, and an invaluable tool when teaching the First World War to groups of students. According to our visitors, the immersive environment has offered a new way to engage with the information in our permanent displays.

"Excellent museum with lots to see and interact with, especially like the trench mock up"

David Horne, Google Review, 2020

"The mock-up of a First World War trench was very thought evoking"

Ian B, TripAdvisor Review, 2015

We would like to build an Anderson Shelter experience which visitors can walk through and explore Second World War history in the same way do with the Great War when visiting the trench.

Anderson shelters were used in WW2 by families as a place to hide when the air raid siren sounded, warning of a potential bomb attack. Photographs of the inside of Anderson shelters at the time show homely touches of cushions and photographs, as well as supplies such as food and entertainment in case families were confined inside for a long time.

Any support you can give will help us purchase the materials to create an Anderson shelter structure and collect some replica WW2 handling materials to furnish it. Think bunk beds, games, blankets and even a chamber pot!

The Anderson shelter experience will become a vital part of our WW2 education sessions which teach about the changes to life at home during wartime, and regular visitors will be able to enjoy it whenever the museum is open. We will also use the handling materials in our reminiscence work which helps participants explore their memories of the past in a safe and welcoming environment.

As a thank you, by helping fund our latest immersive project you could access a range of great rewards, from badges and souvenir guidebooks, to annual passes and even getting your name featured on a plaque in the Anderson shelter display itself.

Any support you can offer is very gratefully received!

The SOFO Museum Team

Find Out More & Support The Project

 Tags: Air-Raid, Anderson Shelter, Blitz, Crowdfunder, Crowdfunding, Donate, Great War, Museum, Oxfordshire, Rewards, Second World War, Support Us, SWW, Trench, Woodstock, WW1, WW2, WWII

Previous:
Refugee Week 2021 – Gunner Gerin: Refugee and Liberator
Next:
Operation Pig Ark – Uncovering an Anderson Shelter in 2020
Related posts
OBJECT OF THE MONTH: EVACUEE’S COAT (OXFORDSHIRE’S MILITARY HERITAGE IN 50 OBJECTS)

Evacuee’s Coat from our Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects Exhibition By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris Philip Williams’ woollen, fully-lined children’s coat would certainly have satisfied the requirement for evacuees to take with them a warm winter coat as they moved from their homes to safer locations elsewhere, often in the countryside. This smart, yet also sensible and practical design, very much reflected the type of coat…

OBJECT OF THE MONTH FEBRUARY 2026: SWEETHEART PIN CUSHION

February’s Object of the Month follows a Valentine’s Day theme! Volunteer Geraldine has selected a First World War pin cushion, shaped like a heart, it has quite a story behind it! Sweetheart Pin Cushion By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris   This sweetheart pin cushion was made during the First World War by a member of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. Sweetheart cushions were not unknown before…

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions