Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
15
Apr
BYDUNCAN PARSONS// BERGEN BELSEN 75, QUEENS OWN OXFORDSHIRE HUSSARS
Bergen-Belsen – Beyond May 1945
Bergen Belsen – Beyond May 1945
Nic Vanderpeet (SOFO Learning and Outreach Officer)
Arthur Tyler, second left, with other men of the 63rd Anti-Tank Regiment (Oxfordshire Yeomanry), near Bergen-Belsen concentration camp, 1945.

The survivors of Bergen Belsen would continue to live in camps after their liberation in April 1945. Camps were established to house Displaced Persons (DPs). Displaced persons were those who had been deported or sent as forced labour to Germany, in the case of Bergen Belsen the majority of the DPs were Polish or Jewish former prisoners.

The survivors of Bergen Belsen were moved from the original camp to the former German army barracks nearby. This became the Bergen Belsen Displaced Persons (DP) camp.

The camp was divided into two parts, a Polish Camp and a Jewish Camp. Both camps had thriving communities with fully functioning schools, hospitals, nurseries, cultural institutions, police and law courts. Many children were born in the camps as people looked to re-establish their lives.

However, there was the ever-present problem of where the people of the camps would settle. Many Poles did not want to return to a Poland dominated by the Soviet Union. For the Jewish people in the camps there was often nowhere to go back to with whole families and communities being destroyed and property lost due to confiscation. Anti-Semitism did not disappear with the end of the Third Reich with pogroms occurring in Poland in 1946.

The Polish Camp was disbanded in September 1946 with the majority returning to Poland. The Jewish Camp remained open until 1950, numbers of DPs decreasing after several years of increased migration to the USA, Canada and the United Kingdom and from 1948 to the new state of Israel.

There were almost 30000 people in the Bergen Belsen DP Camp, part of the millions who had been displaced as a result of the war. Alongside the relief work there was also the task of tracing people, reuniting families and discovering the fate of those dislocated by the conflict in Europe.

This enormous task was undertaken by organisations such as the International Tracing Service (ITS) which was born out of an initiative undertaken by the British Red Cross under the auspices of the Allied High Command. The ITS still exists as the Arolsen Archives and holds records of 17.5 million people persecuted by the Nazi regime.

On a smaller scale were the efforts made by one member of the 249TH Battery, 63rd Anti-Tank Regiment (QOOY), Arthur Tyler. Arthur Tyler took it upon himself while helping with the liberation of Bergen Belsen in April 1945 to record names and addresses of survivor’s relatives in places such as the UK and the USA. This selfless act did have some positive results, small successes in terms of numbers but massive in terms of the families concerned.

“I met very many British soldiers and I asked everybody to write about me to my family, but nobody did it – only you.”

Letter to Arthur Tyler from Naomi Kaplan in America 23rd May 1946.

Sources & Useful Links

Arolsen Archives

Wiener Holocaust Library

Gedenkstätte Bergen-Belsen

 Tags: Belsen75, BergenBelsen, Holocaust, Oxfordshire Yeomanry

Previous:
Pegasus Stories: A Letter From Major John Howard in Normandy, 1944
Next:
Refugee Week 2021 – Gunner Gerin: Refugee and Liberator
Related posts
OBJECT OF THE MONTH (CHRISTMAS 2025): PRINCESS MARY GIFT TIN

December’s Object of the Month had to be a Christmas special! Volunteer Geraldine has selected the iconic First World War gift sent out to troops overseas, researching the boxes themselves and where the men of the Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry would have been spent their Christmas in 1914. Princess Mary’s Gift Boxes By Geraldine Howell Her Royal Highness The Princess Victoria Alexandra Alice Mary was the only daughter of…

THE MAN BEHIND THE MEDALS: LT. CHARLES MORGAN HOARE

From Midshipman to Yeoman: Charles Morgan Hoare Charles Morgan Hoare was the son of Charles Twysden Hoare of Bignell Park, Bicester, and the Hon. Blanche Frances Hoare, daughter of the 1st Baron Tredegar. He was educated at Osborne and Dartmouth, with the intention of him joining the Royal Navy, but he elected for the Army, being Gazetted into the Queen’s Own Oxfordshire Hussars in 1911 and then the 15th Hussars…

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions