Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
Escape Room Experience:
OPERATION SPYCATCHER

Once in a while, the museum is transformed into an immersive ‘escape room’ experience in which you have the run of the main gallery after-hours, to follow themed clues and solve puzzles hidden within the museum.  Under the vigilant gaze of your experienced handler, you and the rest of your team, once briefed, become Special Operations Executive (S.O.E) agents, that have just landed by Horsa Glider - behind enemy lines…

Your mission?  Solve the puzzles and crack the clues to find a missing list of suspected double agents and reveal the identity of the duplicitous spy.  This information must be placed into the hands of a senior member of the War Office within the 45 minutes, otherwise it will fall into enemy hands and put the mission to end the war at risk!

HOSTED BY...

Hosted by experienced team-building facilitator and crime fiction author Helen Saxton of Dead Herring, as your handler, keeping the energy pacy, you are sure to have a memorable and inspirational evening for your teams in the museum!

The whole experience takes up to 90 minutes, including snacks and drinks, briefing, 45-minute puzzle-solving activity, debriefing and congratulations with ‘photo-booth’.

THE PUZZLES

Once you've received your video briefing on board a full size replica section of a horsa glider, you have to find the clues leading to eight different hands-on puzzles, hidden around the museum and corresponding to stories and themes in the museum.  Each one you solve reveals a clue to the next to the ultimate aim of decoding the name of the double agent.  Only with this vital intelligence can you escape the museum and deliver your findings to the War Office for your congratulations!

RATES

£45.00 per person with a minimum group booking requirement.

Includes one glass of house wine/ fruit juice per person, hot served canapes and a congratulatory group photo opportunity in the trench or shelter.

EXAMPLE TIMINGS

An Escape Room Night can host three sessions of up to 10 people each.  Please contact us to discuss your needs. An example of timings is below.

5:45pm – 7:15pm
Arrival & Refreshments - From 5.45pm
Escape Room Experience: 6.15pm - 7.00pm

7:00pm – 8:30pm

Arrival & Refreshments - From 7.00pm
Escape Room Experience: 7.30pm - 8.15pm

8:15pm- 9:45pm

Arrival & Refreshments - From 8:15pm
Escape Room Experience: 8:45pm – 9:30pm

SCHEDULING

The next Escape Room Night is running on 15th May (check the calendar to book a time slot).  For a scheduled night there is a minimum booking charge of 6 persons for a time slot.

If you would like to request a particular date for your group or company, please get in touch via the booking form to discuss your needs and the minimum required to run it.

Do you and your comrades have what it takes to escape the museum? Enquire using the contact form below to book.

Your Name
Your Email
How many people are in your group?
What date(s) were you interested in booking?
Message
Contact Us
Escape Room – Against the Clock

Escape Room – The clock is ticking

Escape Room – Secret rendezvous

Escape Room – Find a way out

Escape Room – Tools of the trade

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions