Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
22
Oct
BYHARRY STAFF// GALLERIES, QUEENS OWN OXFORDSHIRE HUSSARS, VC'S
Man Behind the Medals: Frank Kirby VC
The Man Behind the Medals 

In this blog series, SOFO Museum’s Research volunteers look at the stories behind some of the medal sets in the museum’s collection, from those that can be seen on a visit in our dedicated Medals display, to some of those that are still tucked away in the archive. This is our third VC special, looking instead at men named on our new Oxfordshire Gallantry Board, which tells the story of the county's Victoria Cross and George Cross recipients.

While medals will tell you a little bit about a soldier’s service, it’s only with further research that their full story can be revealed. SOFO’s Research volunteers respond to enquiries we receive through our Research Service, helping people find out more about their relatives who served in the county regiments, and raising funds to support the museum in the process. Using a combination of the museum’s records and those available elsewhere, they piece together stories like this one.

Group Captain Frank Kirby VC CBE

From an enlisted volunteer in the Oxfordshire Yeomanry to senior officer in the Royal Air Force, Frank Kirby had an incredibly varied military career, which also saw him decorated for a number of acts of gallantry while serving in the Royal Engineers during the Boer War.

A photograph of Cpl. Kirby in a local newspaper following his award for gallantry.

Frank Kirby joined the Queen’s Own Oxfordshire Hussars as a Yeoman in January 1889 (service number 57), attending four annual summer camps, until 1892 when he enlisted on 8 August as a Sapper in the Royal Engineers (reg no. 698) at St George’s Barracks, London.

He later transferred to the Mounted Detachment, Royal Engineers, Aldershot, in August 1893. By August 1895 he was appointed Lance Corporal, then promoted to Second Corporal in April 1898. Again he transferred, this time to ‘G’ Company, Royal Engineers, at St Mary’s Barracks, Chatham in August 1898. Just over a year later he re-joined the Mounted Detachment at Aldershot in October 1899, and was promoted to full Corporal the following month.

It was with the Mounted Detachment that he was sent to South Africa in November 1899 and served in the South African Campaign (Boer War) until December 1901. During the conflict he was Mentioned in Despatches several times and took part in blowing up the Bloemfontein Railway in March 1900, for which he was awarded his first decoration for gallantry, the DCM (Distinguished Conduct Medal), in June 1900.

For his actions in that same month, June 1900, during a raid north of Kroonstad under General Hunter Weston, he was awarded the VC (Victoria Cross) in October 1900.

Following this he was promoted in the field, direct from Corporal to Troop Sergeant Major, in April 1901. He was transferred from South Africa to Home Establishment in December 1901 and posted
to the 60th Company, Royal Engineers, Aldershot as Company Sergeant Major.

Another transfer came in January 1902, to the School of Military Engineering at Brompton Barracks, Chatham as a Probationary Field Work Instructor, then promoted to Quarter
Master Sergeant Field Work Instructor in October 1902.

Kirby was appointed Regimental Sergeant Major in December 1906 and served at the School of Military Engineering until 1908, then as Sergeant Major, Training Battalion, 1908 – 1910 before returning to the School of Military Engineering until April 1911. It was in April 1911 that he was gazetted with an honorary commission as a Lieutenant, appointed a Quartermaster, and posted to the newly formed Air Battalion of the Royal Engineers at Farnborough.

A local newspaper described how Frank Kirby was awarded the Victoria Cross

He transferred to the new Royal Flying Corps in May 1912 and helped to form the Central Flying School, Upavon, where he was promoted to Equipment Officer with the temporary rank of Captain in September 1914.

He proceeded to France in March 1916 and commanded No.3 Army Aircraft Park, Royal Flying Corps, at Trevent. He was appointed temporary Major in April 1916 and was given his full Captaincy in the field in January 1917. Captain kirby VC was posted from France to Home Establishment in January 1917 and became Commanding Officer at the No.1 Stores Depot at Greenwich (now Kidbrooke).

In the same month he was appointed as a Temporary Lieutenant Colonel in and was then posted to the Air Ministry as Inspector of Stores Depots in August 1917. He was promoted to the Substantive (actual rank, not temporary or acting) Rank of Major for services in connection with the war in January 1918. The Royal Flying Corps became the Royal Air Force on 1 April 1918, at which time he achieved the Substantive Rank of Lieutenant Colonel.

He was appointed Temporary Colonel to command the Technical Corps, RAF, in August 1918, and an Officer of the British Empire (OBE) in January 1919. Frank Kirby reverted to his Substantive Rank of Lieutenant Colonel in May 1919, following the Armistice, and was posted to Headquarters, South Eastern Area, in June 1919 as Quartermaster General.

On 1 August 1919 the Royal Air Force introduced its own rank titles to replace the previous Army ranks, so Lieutenant Colonel became Wing Commander and Colonel
became Group Captain.

His final posting, in February 1926, was to command No.4 Stores Depot, RAF, at Ickenham

He was appointed a Commander of the British Empire (CBE) in 1926, and retired in December 1926 with the rank of Group Captain (Colonel).

 

 Tags: Boer War, CBE, DCM, First World War, Frank Kirby, FWW, Gallantry, Great War, Man Behind the Medals, Men Behind the Medals, Mentioned in Dispatches, MiD, OBE, Oxfordshire Gallantry Board, Oxfordshire Yeomanry, QOOH, Queens Own Oxfordshire Hussars, RAF, RFC, Royal Air Force, Royal Engineers, Royal Flying Corps, Victoria Cross, World War One, WW1, WWI

Previous:
MBTM Blog – The Real Charles Bourne Part 2
Next:
The Attack on Monte Camino 1943 (80th Anniversary)
Related posts
OBJECT OF THE MONTH FEBRUARY 2026: SWEETHEART PIN CUSHION

February’s Object of the Month follows a Valentine’s Day theme! Volunteer Geraldine has selected a First World War pin cushion, shaped like a heart, it has quite a story behind it! Sweetheart Pin Cushion By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris   This sweetheart pin cushion was made during the First World War by a member of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. Sweetheart cushions were not unknown before…

OBJECT OF THE MONTH (CHRISTMAS 2025): PRINCESS MARY GIFT TIN

December’s Object of the Month had to be a Christmas special! Volunteer Geraldine has selected the iconic First World War gift sent out to troops overseas, researching the boxes themselves and where the men of the Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry would have been spent their Christmas in 1914. Princess Mary’s Gift Boxes By Geraldine Howell Her Royal Highness The Princess Victoria Alexandra Alice Mary was the only daughter of…

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions