Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
19
Jan
BYDUNCAN PARSONS// BERGEN BELSEN 75, GALLERIES, QUEENS OWN OXFORDSHIRE HUSSARS, VISIT US
A remarkable story of kindness during wartime forms new display at the Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum for Holocaust Memorial Day 2024
Naomi & Arthur: Letters from Liberation

A new permanent exhibition opens on 27th January 2024 at the Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum, tells a story of how a small act of kindness can have a life-changing impact. It will focus on two people from different worlds – Arthur Tyler, a soldier with the Oxfordshire Yeomanry, and Naomi Kaplan, a Polish Jew who survived both Auschwitz-Birkenau and Bergen-Belsen concentration camps.

Naomi Kaplan

When the Oxfordshire Yeomanry (at the time serving as an anti-tank battery of the Royal Artillery) liberated Bergen-Belsen on 15th April 1945, they found prisoners living in appalling conditions of disease, starvation and cruelty, with many thousands of unburied dead. Naomi Kaplan was one of the survivors who had endured several years in the Nazi camp system.

Royal Artillery Tracer Card for Arthur Tyler (Courtesy of the Royal Artillery Museum)

She approached soldier Arthur Tyler and asked him to write to her family to tell them she was alive. Her mother, husband and sister-in-law had all perished in Auschwitz, but Naomi remembered the address of her Uncle Bill in Houston, USA. Arthur wrote a letter straight away and began a correspondence with Naomi’s sister Elizabeth Brandon, who was also safe in Houston.

In her response, Elizabeth thanked Arthur, saying:

‘I am infinitely happy to know that she is alive and well and I will not rest until we are reunited.’

Naomi herself described the effect of being reconnected to her family as ‘a continuation of wonderful experiences’, as her brother-in-law and other US Army soldiers were soon able to visit her in Germany.When Naomi eventually reached the USA, she also wrote to Arthur, to thank him saying:

‘I met very many British soldiers and I asked everybody to write about me to my family, but nobody did it – only you.’

Her optimism and courage were clear from her attitude to her new beginning in the USA, reunited with her remaining family: ‘I try to forget my sad past, I am thinking about the fine present and the beautiful future.’

Naomi became a highly successful businesswoman in Houston, bringing up three children and running an international meat import and processing company. She remembered Arthur’s kindness throughout her life, telling her family of the soldier who had helped her. Her retirement was filled with philanthropy, sharing her experiences with young people and supporting Holocaust Museum Houston. For her 80th birthday and to celebrate her extraordinary life, her three children established an education programme – the Warren Fellowship for Future Teachers – based at Holocaust Museum Houston, which continues to teach and inspire.

Arthur led a modest life in London after the war. But he never forgot what he had seen at Bergen-Belsen.

Arthur Tyler after the war

Almost 50 years after the liberation he protested against Holocaust denial, standing shoulder to shoulder with survivors, and being interviewed for several national newspapers. Both Naomi and Arthur had their lives changed by their meeting at Bergen-Belsen. Now a new generation has been touched by the story. Research by Dr Myfanwy Lloyd has enabled the museum to connect with Naomi’s children and grandchildren in Houston. Through their generosity, oiur visitors will be able to see the original letters, family photographs and newspaper reports that tell the story of Naomi and Arthur.

Ursula Corcoran, Museum Director said:

‘Letters from Liberation is a war-time story with a difference – focusing on an act of kindness, and the courage of survival. Through Naomi and Arthur we can remember the devastation that the Nazi regime inflicted on so many families. But we also see that humanity can shine through in the bleakest of situations. The story is also a powerful reminder that we need to be vigilant against Holocaust denial and the rise of authoritarian rule. The new display gives a human face to the Holocaust Memorial Day theme for 2024 - the ‘Fragility of Freedom’.

‘Naomi and Arthur: Letters from Liberation’ goes on display at the Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum from 27th January 2024, an addition to our existing exhibition, The Oxfordshire Yeomanry and the Liberation of Bergen-Belsen Concentration Camp.

The women's camp at Bergen-Belsen, at liberation

 

 

 Tags: Arthur Tyler, Auschwitz, Bergen-Belsen, HMD, Holocaust, Holocaust Memorial Day, Holocaust Museum Houston, Letters from Liberation, Naomi Kaplan, Oxfordshire Yeomanry, Royal Artillery, Royal Artillery Museum, Second World War, World War 2, World War Two, WW2

Previous:
The Attack on Monte Camino 1943 (80th Anniversary)
Next:
Women of the ATA – Freydis Mary Sharland
Related posts
OBJECT OF THE MONTH: EVACUEE’S COAT (OXFORDSHIRE’S MILITARY HERITAGE IN 50 OBJECTS)

Evacuee’s Coat from our Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects Exhibition By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris Philip Williams’ woollen, fully-lined children’s coat would certainly have satisfied the requirement for evacuees to take with them a warm winter coat as they moved from their homes to safer locations elsewhere, often in the countryside. This smart, yet also sensible and practical design, very much reflected the type of coat…

OBJECT OF THE MONTH (CHRISTMAS 2025): PRINCESS MARY GIFT TIN

December’s Object of the Month had to be a Christmas special! Volunteer Geraldine has selected the iconic First World War gift sent out to troops overseas, researching the boxes themselves and where the men of the Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry would have been spent their Christmas in 1914. Princess Mary’s Gift Boxes By Geraldine Howell Her Royal Highness The Princess Victoria Alexandra Alice Mary was the only daughter of…

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions