Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
10
Nov
BYDUNCAN PARSONS// ABOUT US, SUPPORT US
New Volunteer Opportunities at SOFO Museum
New Volunteer Opportunities at SOFO

Do you enjoy telling the stories about the museum’s collection? Are you someone who enjoys being hands-on and getting stuck into events? The museum is on the lookout for Engagement Volunteers to support the museum to engage visitors from all ages.

Become an Engagement Volunteer!

About the Role

We are looking for Engagement Volunteers to support the museum in engaging visitors of all ages.

For volunteering with younger visitors, we need support with:
- Helping to prep and deliver the museum’s education programme for Key Stage 1 and 2
- Supporting family workshops during the holidays
- Contributing creative ideas for family friendly activities throughout the museum

A family visiting SOFO during the Children and Military Lives exhibition launch event with charity, Little Troopers (CJM Photography)

For volunteering with older visitors, we need support with:
- Assisting with the delivery of talks, such as ‘Oxfordshire’s Military History in 50 Objects’
- Supporting handling object sessions with different community groups
- Carrying out research to develop the outreach programme

The Museum Director gives a talk to museum supporters (CJM Photography)

You can decide to focus on delivering engagement to adults or children, or both!

You do not need to have any prior experience of the national curriculum, but an interest in social or military history or museum work would be helpful. Full training on how to use our resources including how to handle the objects will be given, along with tea and biscuits! A DBS check will be required.

Skills you could develop:
- Experience being part of an engagement programme
- Developing the ability to adapt material for different audiences
- Museum object handling

To apply:
If you are interested in becoming an Engagement Volunteer, please contact Kim Davies, the Collections and Public Engagement Manager at engagement@sofo.org.uk

---

About the Museum

The Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum is a military museum that explores the relationship between conflict and the county of Oxfordshire from the American War of Independence to the modern day.
We have an integrated archive at the museum, which houses the collections of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry, the Oxfordshire Yeomanry (Queens Own Oxfordshire Hussars), and our own SOFO collection which incorporates material from the Ox and Bucks as well as local and social history objects.

 Tags: Engagement, Events, Museum, Museums, Opportunities, Skills, Support Us, Volunteer, Volunteering, Volunteers

Previous:
The Man Behind the Medals: Reverend Edward Montmorency Guilford MC
Next:
The Man Behind the Medals: Lt. Vivian Edward Fanning
Related posts
OBJECT OF THE MONTH: EVACUEE’S COAT (OXFORDSHIRE’S MILITARY HERITAGE IN 50 OBJECTS)

Evacuee’s Coat from our Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects Exhibition By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris Philip Williams’ woollen, fully-lined children’s coat would certainly have satisfied the requirement for evacuees to take with them a warm winter coat as they moved from their homes to safer locations elsewhere, often in the countryside. This smart, yet also sensible and practical design, very much reflected the type of coat…

JOIN US FOR OUR ARMED FORCES DAY CELEBRATION ON 1ST JULY 2023

Join us for our Armed Forces Day celebration on 1st July 2023! Serving Armed Forces, Veterans and Cadets can visit FREE One week on from National Armed Forces Day, we’re inviting members of the Armed Forces community to come and enjoy the museum, a range of events, and our Women and War exhibition, FREE! Alongside our permanent exhibitions, covering the history of the county regiments and many other aspects of…

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions