Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
24
Sep
BYSTEPHEN BERRIDGE// COLLECTION, OXFORD AND BUCKS LIGHT INFANTRY
When the Oxf and Bucks went “A Bridge Too Far” – 24th September 1944
JOHN FROST BRIDGE, ARNHEM (IMAGE ©STEPHEN BERRIDGE)
On this day 24th September 1944
1ST AIRBORNE DIVISION – ARNHEM

Since the formation of the Oosterbeek Perimeter, the 1st Airborne had accumulated an enormous quantity of wounded, both British and German, and by the morning of Sunday 24th September, the medical staff had approximately one thousand two hundred men in their care.

On Sunday 24th, Colonel Graeme Warrack, the 1st Airborne Division's senior medical officer, obtained permission to arrange a truce with the Germans, generously complied with by Obergruppenführer Bittrich, commander of the II SS Panzer Korps, in order to evacuate as many of the wounded as possible into German care, where, although they would become prisoners of war, they would at least be sure of appropriate medical attention. German vehicles entered the Perimeter during the truce and removed approximately two hundred and fifty stretcher-bound men, whilst a further two hundred walking wounded were marched to the St Elizabeth Hospital.

Extract from 1st Airlanding Brigade War Diary:

Days of continuous mortaring and shelling which resulted in a steady drain of men. Reports from units showed a rapid decrease in numbers caused by this and continuous attacks by infantry, tanks, including flame throwers and SP guns. All attacks were repulsed with the assistance of the Medium guns from 30 Corps. Nevertheless snipers and SP guns succeeded in infiltrating behind most units and even established themselves in a position 100 yds from Brigade HQ from which they could not be dislodged. Lieut. Austin, Brigade JLO and a number of valuable NCOs of Brigade HQ were killed on 24 Sep trying to drive them back. The Brigade Commander received from the Divisional Commander a warning of what action was to be taken in the event of the Division being overrun.

German prisoners taken in Nijmegen © IWM (B 10168)

Wounded being brought into a dressing station at Wolfheze © IWM (BU 1158)

Men of the Campaign:
Major John Frederick Bernard BLATCH - Glider Pilot Regiment, Second in Command Number 2 Wing

Commissioned into the Territorial Buckinghamshire Battalion of the Regiment in August 1939. He served with the Battalion in France and Belgium in 1940. He was wounded during the withdrawal to Dunkirk and after evacuation rejoined the Battalion in July 1940 as Regimental Signals Officer. In February 1942 he transferred to the Glider Pilot Regiment and by the time of Arnhem was Second in Command of its Number 2 Wing.

After Operation Market Garden he was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross:

“Major Blatch took off on 17th September 1944 from Broadwell, but owing to very bad weather was compelled to land in England, this he succeeded in doing safely; the next day he again took off in his glider and over Holland the tug aircraft was hit by flak and Major Blatch's glider had the whole of one aileron shot away, thereby causing him to force land, this he succeeded in doing successfully just inside the British lines near the Albert Canal. Major Blatch then succeeded in contacting HQ Airborne Forces at Nijmegen and made determined efforts to rejoin the Wing in the Arnhem area; but failed to do so. Had it not been for his flying skill, it is certain that the load he was carrying in his glider, which included senior officers, would have suffered serious injury.”

Distinguished Flying Cross

This blog is part of a series which will be published each day from 17th to 26th September 2021, 77 years on from the day in which the events described happened.

Stephen Berridge has long been a volunteer at Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum, and has an encyclopedic knowledge of all things Oxf & Bucks Light Infantry - his knowledge has helped us put together a number of our exhibits - most recently a new Battles display featuring stories from Arnhem.

Enjoyed reading this article? Please consider supporting SOFO Museum with a donation:
DONATE NOW

 Tags: 1944, 1st Battalion, 2nd Battalion, Airborne, Arnhem, Arnhem77, Market Garden, Ox & Bucks, Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry, Second World War, SWW, WW2

Previous:
When the Oxf and Bucks went “A Bridge Too Far” – 23rd September 1944
Next:
When the Oxf and Bucks went “A Bridge Too Far” – 25th September 1944
Related posts
OBJECT OF THE MONTH: EVACUEE’S COAT (OXFORDSHIRE’S MILITARY HERITAGE IN 50 OBJECTS)

Evacuee’s Coat from our Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects Exhibition By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris Philip Williams’ woollen, fully-lined children’s coat would certainly have satisfied the requirement for evacuees to take with them a warm winter coat as they moved from their homes to safer locations elsewhere, often in the countryside. This smart, yet also sensible and practical design, very much reflected the type of coat…

OBJECT OF THE MONTH FEBRUARY 2026: SWEETHEART PIN CUSHION

February’s Object of the Month follows a Valentine’s Day theme! Volunteer Geraldine has selected a First World War pin cushion, shaped like a heart, it has quite a story behind it! Sweetheart Pin Cushion By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris   This sweetheart pin cushion was made during the First World War by a member of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. Sweetheart cushions were not unknown before…

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions