Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
25
Sep
BYSTEPHEN BERRIDGE// COLLECTION, OXFORD AND BUCKS LIGHT INFANTRY
When the Oxf and Bucks went “A Bridge Too Far” – 25th September 1944
JOHN FROST BRIDGE, ARNHEM (IMAGE ©STEPHEN BERRIDGE)
On this day 25th September 1944
1ST AIRBORNE DIVISION – ARNHEM

The situation had become hopeless.

A mere eleven percent of the supplies dropped by the Royal Air Force had fallen within the perimeter.

The troops were exhausted by lack of food, water and sleep. There was very little ammunition. The crossing of the Polish Parachute Brigade which had dropped near Driel had become a failure due to a shortage of boats. Only about 350 men reach Oosterbeek. The attack by the 4th Battalion of the Dorset Regiment on Westerbouwing heights during the night of 25th September ends in disaster.

The following evening the withdrawal takes place under heavy German fire.

Lt David Eastwood MC

Men of the Campaign:
Lieutenant Herbert David EASTWOOD - 21st Independent Parachute Company. Platoon Commander, Number 1 Platoon

Commissioned into the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry in February 1940 he was posted to the 2nd Battalion (the 52nd) who were at that time in India. When the Germans invaded Holland, Belgium and France, it was recalled to the UK where it became part of the 31st Independent Brigade Group.

In May 1940, David was sent to the HQ of the Brigade Group as a Liaison Officer and later was appointed as Staff Captain Q. Later, when this unit became the 1st Airlanding Brigade and part of the 1st Airborne Division, General Hopkinson appointed him as GSO 3 (Air), a post he held during the invasion of Sicily where very serious lessons were learned, including the need for an enhanced Pathfinding capability. When news was received of the impending Italian surrender the Division was taken to Italy by the Royal Navy. Later, the majority of the Division was withdrawn in preparation for D Day.

Arriving back in the UK, General Browning took David to brief the D-Day planners near Grosvenor Square in London. When David heard of the vacancy of No. 1 Platoon Commander in the 21st Independent Parachute Company he applied and joined the Company at the rank of Lieutenant. He served with the them in Holland (Arnhem) and Norway.

For his actions at Arnhem he was awarded the Military Cross:

“The above officer led his platoon with great gallantry throughout the action. On the evening of 18th September, he was detailed with his platoon to put out navigational aids on LZ 'L' for a supply drop. He found the enemy in occupation of this area in some strength. He immediately attacked them, killing or capturing the lot.
On 19th September 1944 he again returned to the area to assist in the landing of the gliders. As soon as the gliders appeared the enemy put in an attack. This was driven off and the enemy held until all the gliders had been unloaded. Later he found that his route back to the Company area had been cut by the enemy, but he successfully led his platoon through the enemy positions.
On 20th September 1944 until the withdrawal on 25th September 1944, he held a position which was constantly exposed to murderous enemy fire, but regardless of personal danger he went constantly round his section positions encouraging his men.

His great example undoubtedly kept the spirits of his men at such a high level that in spite of numerous enemy attacks and heavy casualties they hung on to their positions until the end.”

The Military Cross

This blog is part of a series which will be published each day from 17th to 26th September 2021, 77 years on from the day in which the events described happened.

Stephen Berridge has long been a volunteer at Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum, and has an encyclopedic knowledge of all things Oxf & Bucks Light Infantry - his knowledge has helped us put together a number of our exhibits - most recently a new Battles display featuring stories from Arnhem.

Enjoyed reading this article? Please consider supporting SOFO Museum with a donation:
DONATE NOW

 Tags: 1944, 1st Battalion, 2nd Battalion, Airborne, Arnhem, Arnhem77, Market Garden, Ox & Bucks, Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry, Second World War, SWW, WW2

Previous:
When the Oxf and Bucks went “A Bridge Too Far” – 24th September 1944
Next:
When the Oxf and Bucks went “A Bridge Too Far” – 26th September 1944
Related posts
OBJECT OF THE MONTH: EVACUEE’S COAT (OXFORDSHIRE’S MILITARY HERITAGE IN 50 OBJECTS)

Evacuee’s Coat from our Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects Exhibition By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris Philip Williams’ woollen, fully-lined children’s coat would certainly have satisfied the requirement for evacuees to take with them a warm winter coat as they moved from their homes to safer locations elsewhere, often in the countryside. This smart, yet also sensible and practical design, very much reflected the type of coat…

OBJECT OF THE MONTH FEBRUARY 2026: SWEETHEART PIN CUSHION

February’s Object of the Month follows a Valentine’s Day theme! Volunteer Geraldine has selected a First World War pin cushion, shaped like a heart, it has quite a story behind it! Sweetheart Pin Cushion By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris   This sweetheart pin cushion was made during the First World War by a member of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. Sweetheart cushions were not unknown before…

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions