Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
Venue and Room Hire:

The Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum is a fantastic venue in the middle of the historic Cotswolds town of Woodstock, Oxfordshire, nestled at the bottom of the beautiful walled garden of The Oxfordshire Museum, and on the doorstep of the historic Blenheim Palace.

Beyond an exhibition space

Whether it’s business networking, a regular meeting, or celebrating a special occasions, you'll find one of our spaces to suit your needs. In our bright, dynamic and modern spaces,  we've hosted everything from birthday parties, to wedding anniversaries and celebration of life services. Alongside exhibitions we've hosted craft fairs, book launches and training courses.

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum is a unique venue for a wide range of events and occasions. Ideal for meetings of any size, the Briefing Room can be expanded into our Main Hall through a partition wall, opening up a wider space to welcome bigger crowds at your next event.

Download a copy of this Venue Hire brochure here >>>

Additional Hire Services
A member of our team on-hand to assist with your booking
Event listings in our newsletters and brochures (if applicable)
A variety of in-house catering options, including tea, coffee and locally hand-made cakes
Kitchen and catering facilities for use alongside your booking
A reduced entry fee for your guests/delegates into the galleries.
Availability

Our regular availability times are:

Tuesday – Saturday: 9am-5pm
Sundays: 2pm-5pm

For booking outside of these hours, or bookings that require private hire of the entire venue during public opening times, additional fees may apply.

 

 

Kitchen Facilities & Catering

If you need catering services throughout your booking, we have 5* Hygiene-rated kitchen facilities on site, which can be hired alongside rooms for your own or your preferred caterer's use. Alternatively we have recommended caterers we have used for many of our own events.

Catering Price Guide

Kitchen hire from £10

Canapés from £15 per head

Seated dinner £40 per head

Buffet dinner from £35 per head

Prices may vary depending on menu choices and do not include staffing.

To discuss your booking in more detail, or for any other enquiries, please contact us at fundraising@sofo.org.uk

Children’s Parties

Find out more about our kids' party offer here.

 

 

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum is a recommended venue for Spy:Co parties.

Find out more about having your own spy-themed birthday party!

 

Escape Room
Looking for something truly unique?

We now ofter an escape room experience, perfect for parties, stag and hen groups, as well as corporate events and team building!

Are you up to the challenge of Operation Spy Catcher? Crack clues and solve puzzles to identify the hidden identity of a double agent and excape occupied France in a unique Second World War-themed escape room experience.

Room and Venue Hire Enquiries
Your Name
Your Email
Hire Dates
Preferred dates of hire
Attendees
Estimated number of attendees or group size
Message
How did you find out about us?
How did you find out about us?
Contact Us

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions