Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
10
Sep
BYJOHN SHELDON// COLLECTION, GALLERIES, OXFORD AND BUCKS LIGHT INFANTRY, RESEARCH
Stories from the SOFO Archives: Flight Lieutenant Bernard “Pop” Green RAFVR, MC
Stories from the SOFO Archives: Flight Lieutenant Bernard “Pop” Green RAFVR, MC
Decorated Great War Officer in the Ox & Bucks, and in the Second World War, a Great Escaper and Long March Survivor

Bernard Green from Bourne End, Bucks survived both the Great War and the Second World War – just.

2nd Lieutenant Bernard Green served with distinction in the First World War at Ypres, and on the Somme on the Western Front in the Territorial 1st Buckinghamshire Battalion, the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. He was seriously wounded twice, Mentioned in Despatches, awarded the Military Cross, and by 1918 had risen to the rank of Major in the Machine Gun Corps.

LT. BERNARD 'POP' GREEN IN THE BUCKS BATTALION

21 years later, Bernard was 52 at the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, earning him the nickname “Pop.” He volunteered for action and was commissioned into the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve as an Air Gunner, a notoriously dangerous role. His first mission in July 1940 ended when his plane was shot down. Green was captured and imprisoned at Stalag Luft III, a vast camp for Allied aircrew at Sagan in eastern Germany.

In 1943, the escape committee at Sagan planned the famous “Great Escape”, which would involve 200 POWs leaving the camp through long, deep tunnels. More than 600 prisoners were involved in digging the tunnels and shifting 230 tons of sand. ”Pop” worked as a “penguin”, scattering sand from the tunnels out of pouches in his trousers while shuffling around the compound.

On the night of the Great Escape, 24 March 1944, “Pop” Green was the thirty-third and oldest of 76 men to leave tunnel “Harry.”

Within 24 hours he had been recaptured and returned to Sagan, but was fortunate compared to some. 50 of the captured escapers were murdered on Hitler’s direct orders.
Just three POWs made successful “home runs”, but as they had planned, the Great Escape seriously embarrassed the German authorities and diverted enormous police and military manpower to hunting down the escapees.

POP GREEN AND JOHNNIE DODGE AT SAGAN, CIRCA 1943

As the war entered its final phase and the Allied armies encircled Nazi Germany, Prisoners of War agonised over whether they would simply be released as the Allies drew near, used as bargaining tools to stave off total surrender, or at worst, murdered by their captors. The Nazis pointlessly chose to hang on to their captives, and progressively from late January 1945, camps in the east were evacuated and men force marched west before the approaching Soviet army.

Half starved, prisoners were inadequately dressed and provisioned for strenuous marches across Germany in the heavy snowfalls and sub-zero temperatures of winter 1944-45. Exhausted men dropped from dysentery and exposure, or were simply shot by their captors where they fell.

Flight Lieutenant Bernard “Pop” Green marching out of Stalag Luft III recorded;

“…after a couple of hours, men started to fall behind and sit down on the hard frozen road surface with utter exhaustion on their faces… gun shots recoiled from the rear of the column. The occasional guard would also collapse with a clatter... he too would be left to his fate.”

Bernard Green’s wartime ordeals finally ended after the Long March westward in the atrocious winter of 1945.

He was eventually liberated on 2 May 1945, near Lübeck in western Germany. For his part in the Great Escape, he was awarded a second Mention in Despatches.

He died in 1971 at the age of 83.

You can find out more about the story of 'Pop' Green and other Prisoners of War in SOFO's permanent exhibition POWs: At Home and Abroad.

Do you have a relative that served in the Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry or Oxfordshire Yeomanry? Our Research Enquiry Service might be able to help you find out more about their story.

 Tags: 1st Buckinghamshire Battalion, Bernard Green, Bucks Battalion, First World War, FWW, Galleries, Great Escape, Great War, Lieutenant Bernard Green, Long March, Military Cross, Ox & Bucks, Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry, Pop Green, POW, POWs, RAF, Royal Air Force, Second World War, SWW, World War One, World War Two, WW1, WW2

Previous:
SOFO Museum Chairman Ian Inshaw steps down after 15 years
Next:
When the Oxf and Bucks went “A Bridge Too Far”
Related posts
OBJECT OF THE MONTH: EVACUEE’S COAT (OXFORDSHIRE’S MILITARY HERITAGE IN 50 OBJECTS)

Evacuee’s Coat from our Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects Exhibition By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris Philip Williams’ woollen, fully-lined children’s coat would certainly have satisfied the requirement for evacuees to take with them a warm winter coat as they moved from their homes to safer locations elsewhere, often in the countryside. This smart, yet also sensible and practical design, very much reflected the type of coat…

OBJECT OF THE MONTH FEBRUARY 2026: SWEETHEART PIN CUSHION

February’s Object of the Month follows a Valentine’s Day theme! Volunteer Geraldine has selected a First World War pin cushion, shaped like a heart, it has quite a story behind it! Sweetheart Pin Cushion By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris   This sweetheart pin cushion was made during the First World War by a member of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. Sweetheart cushions were not unknown before…

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions