Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
04
Aug
BYDUNCAN PARSONS// VISIT US, WHATSON
SOFO Summer Shelter Competition
SOFO Summer Shelter Competition!

To celebrate our recently opened Anderson Shelter display (built with the support of our wonderful Crowdfunder backers!) we're running a special competition this Summer - show us your own home-made air-raid shelters and we'll award prizes to the best! Plus, we'll feature submissions in an online gallery - so they'll all be museum pieces!

Here are a couple of examples of shelters crafted by the museum team's families to give you an idea of what we're looking for - can you build better?

Who can join in?

There will be two categories, and prizes for the best in each:

Ages 11+
Under 11s
How do we enter?

Send us a photo of your creation, or bring it with you on a visit to the museum, and let us know which category you're competing in, plus leave us with a name and contact detail we can use if your shelter is picked!

You can send us a picture of your shelter via email, send us a direct message on our social media accounts, or post them in the comments below the competition post.

What can you win?

Win a family annual pass, covering museum entry for two adults and up to four children for a whole year!

Plus, bring your shelter in with you, or a photo of it, when you visit the museum and get a free child day admission.

When does the competition end?

The closing date for the competion will be 30th September 2022, we'll contact and announce winners shortly after!

Terms and Conditions:

One competition entry per child, though households with multiple children wishing to submit a shelter for the competition can submit one entry from each child. These terms also apply to the free child day admission offer open to all competition entrants.

Selected winners will be contacted shortly after the closing date using the contact detail left with us for the purposes of the competition, or if your entry was submitted via social media, we'll attempt to contact winners by direct message on the social media platform the winning entry was submitted on. Your contact details will not be used for marketing or any other purposes, but if you would like updates on events and exhibitions at the museum, please join our mailing list here.

 Tags: Anderson Shelter, Blitz, competition, crafts, families, Museum, summer, summer holidays, Whats On, Win

Previous:
Winston Churchill, Blenheim Palace, and the Oxfordshire Yeomanry Connection
Next:
The Man Behind the Medals: Major John Windham Meade
Related posts
OBJECT OF THE MONTH: EVACUEE’S COAT (OXFORDSHIRE’S MILITARY HERITAGE IN 50 OBJECTS)

Evacuee’s Coat from our Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects Exhibition By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris Philip Williams’ woollen, fully-lined children’s coat would certainly have satisfied the requirement for evacuees to take with them a warm winter coat as they moved from their homes to safer locations elsewhere, often in the countryside. This smart, yet also sensible and practical design, very much reflected the type of coat…

OBJECT OF THE MONTH FEBRUARY 2026: SWEETHEART PIN CUSHION

February’s Object of the Month follows a Valentine’s Day theme! Volunteer Geraldine has selected a First World War pin cushion, shaped like a heart, it has quite a story behind it! Sweetheart Pin Cushion By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris   This sweetheart pin cushion was made during the First World War by a member of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. Sweetheart cushions were not unknown before…

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions