Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
19
Sep
BYDAVID RUSHTON// COLLECTION, CONFLICT AND COUNTY: SOLDIERS OF OXFORDSHIRE, OXFORD AND BUCKS LIGHT INFANTRY, RESEARCH, SUPPORT US
The Man Behind the Medals: Sergeant George Turk
The Man Behind the Medals 

In this blog series, SOFO Museum's Research volunteers look at the stories behind some of the medal sets in the museum's collection, from those that can be seen on a visit in our dedicated Medals display to some of those that are still tucked away in the archive.

While medals will tell you a little bit about a soldier's service, it's only with further research that their full story can be revealed! SOFO's Research volunteers respond to enquiries we receive through our Research Service, helping people find out more about their relatives who served in the county regiments, and raising funds to support the museum in the process. Using a combination of the museum's records and those available elsewhere, they piece together stories like this one.

Sergeant 5378415 George Turk

George Turk was born on the 20th October 1906 in Bristol, the son of Frank & Alice Turk, being baptised at St Simon’s on the 4th December, with Frank’s trade being given as a mason’s labourer. The 1911 Census had the large family still living in Bristol, with George having 3 brothers and 3 sisters.

George lost two elder brothers in WW1. Francis was Killed in Action with the Kings Royal Rifle Corps in France in 1914, and Edward with the Royal Berks on the Western Front in 1918. Nevertheless, George Turk joined the Army in 1925, being attested into the Ox & Bucks LI on the 6th August that year. He served initially in the 1st Bn – the old 43rd – before being transferred to the 2nd Bn (the 52nd) for service in India.

When Pte Turk joined A Company of the 2nd Bn they were serving in Rawalpindi, but that was followed by service on the NW Frontier and then in Burma during the Galon Rebellion. Later the battalion moved back to India at Bareilly. His service entitled him to the award of the India GS Medal, with a clasp for Burma 1930-32.

George seemed to take to peacetime Army life, being promoted to Corporal in 1933 and enjoying great success at boxing. Cpl Turk won the

Regimental Trophy Belt at Welterweight for five successive years, successfully represented the Regiment up to Army Level and eventually had to move up a weight to find suitable opponents!

Welterweight Boxing Trophy Belt, 1929 - 34, naming George Turk as a repeat winner

He married Eileen Walters in Rangoon in 1934 before completing his time and returning to Britain. However, WW2 saw him returning to the Colours with the 2nd OBLI as a Sgt, although he transferred to the Suffolk Regiment in April 1942. The Suffolks went ashore on D-Day and fought through France & Germany until the end of the war, while another battalion saw service in North Africa and Italy.

After the war, Sgt Turk married once more, to Emily Chedzey in 1947 in Bristol and remained in the Army serving with the Royal Army Ordnance Corps between 1949/1951. He died in Chippenham, Wilts in 1978.

Awards:
Indian GSM & Clasp, 1939-45 Star, Africa Star, Defence Medal, LSGCM, MSM

Medals awarded to George Turk, in the SOFO Museum collection

 Tags: 1st Battalion, 2nd Battalion, 43rd, 52nd, Belt, Boxing, India, Man Behind the Medals, Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry, Second World War, Sports, SWW, Trophy, World War Two, WW2

Previous:
The Man Behind the Medals: Alfred Wilcox VC
Next:
The Man Behind the Medals: Corporal Edward T Bowles
Related posts
OBJECT OF THE MONTH: EVACUEE’S COAT (OXFORDSHIRE’S MILITARY HERITAGE IN 50 OBJECTS)

Evacuee’s Coat from our Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects Exhibition By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris Philip Williams’ woollen, fully-lined children’s coat would certainly have satisfied the requirement for evacuees to take with them a warm winter coat as they moved from their homes to safer locations elsewhere, often in the countryside. This smart, yet also sensible and practical design, very much reflected the type of coat…

OBJECT OF THE MONTH FEBRUARY 2026: SWEETHEART PIN CUSHION

February’s Object of the Month follows a Valentine’s Day theme! Volunteer Geraldine has selected a First World War pin cushion, shaped like a heart, it has quite a story behind it! Sweetheart Pin Cushion By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris   This sweetheart pin cushion was made during the First World War by a member of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. Sweetheart cushions were not unknown before…

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions