Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
VISIT SOFO MUSEUM
Everything you need to plan your day out

 

SOFO Museum first opened during the summer of 2014, tucked away in the beautiful gardens in the grounds of The Oxfordshire Museum and Woodstock Library, and just on the doorstep of Blenheim Palace.
More than a local military museum, SOFO is a museum that everyone can enjoy, from kids to parents, and to grandparents. We tell stories of how conflict has affected the county and its people, from soldiers serving on the front lines to ordinary people living on the Home Front.
On top of a range of ever-changing displays and events, our permanent exhibits explore topics that you’ll find surprising and moving in equal measure, such as raw accounts of the liberation of Bergen-Belsen from both camp survivors and Oxfordshire soldiers. Battles of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry puts you on-board a Horsa Glider as it prepares to land in Normandy in the early hours of D-Day 1944, while Secret Agents, Secret Armies explores the real world of spies and espionage through the lens of Ian Fleming and James Bond
SOFO holds a collection of over 3,500 objects and 7,500 archive items from two county regiments, the Queens Own Oxfordshire Hussars (QOOH) and the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. These are our starting point for reflecting on the county’s rich and diverse military heritage.
What people say about us
SOFO Museum is great day out, but don't just take our word for it...
Hidden Gem

"Hidden away in Woodstock but well worth a visit"

"Undiscovered gem"

"Cracking little museum"

Trip Advisor Reviews

Family Fun

“great for all the family!”

“grandchildren loved it”

“a brilliant place to take a family”

More Facebook Reviews

A Hit with History Buffs

“A must for local historians”

"crammed with interesting militaria"

“A refreshingly interesting military museum”

More Google Reviews

What's the best time to drop in?
Our Opening Times

Tuesday - Saturday: 11am - 5pm

Sundays: 2pm - 5pm.

(We don't 'do' Mondays!)

How long do you need to visit?

We recommend at least 1 hour to get the most from your visit

Last Admission: 4.15pm (everyday)

Changes to our normal opening times:

May Bank Holidays

BH Monday 4 May 2026: Open 2pm – 5pm
BH Monday 25 May 2026: Open 2pm – 5pm

Autism Friendly Visits

For families with Special Educational Needs, including Autistic Spectrum Disorder, we can also open outside our regular hours. If you'd prefer to enjoy the Museum at a quieter time, without needing to worry about other visitors, and with many of the gallery sounds turned off, or our lighting dimmed. Explore our gallery spaces in peace, or get hands-on with our activities.

Please contact us for more information and to book. Children and young people under 18 go free; adults charged at standard admission rate.

Regular times for these visits can be arranged each week from 10am - 11am on Saturdays in term time, or Wednesdays and Fridays during school holidays.

Contact us at education@sofo.org.uk to book and for more details.

Download a Dimensions Autism Friendly Social Story guide to the museum here or a copy of our gallery map here.

Buying a ticket
Just drop in, or book tickets in advance - it's up to you!
Admission Prices

One ticket, twelve months unlimited entry to all of our exhibitions.

Adults: £9.00

Concessions:  £8.00 (Seniors, Students, Armed Forces)

Children (5-16yrs) £5.50

Under 5s: Free

Carers: Free

Family Tickets

1 Adult, 2 Children: £15.00

1 Adult, up to 4 Children: £20.00

2 Adults, up to 4 Children: £28.00

Gift Aid: If you can make a Gift Aid donation, Soldiers of Oxfordshire Trust can reclaim an extra 25% on your ticket. It costs you nothing and goes directly towards the preservation of our collections.

Book Online

Book your admissions ahead of your visit via the TxGB Booking Portal

Book Now

Friends' Membership

Becoming a Friend of the museum doesn't cost the world, and entitles you to a range of benefits - including free admission, exclusive events and invites, a copy of our guidebook, special offers and more!

Find out more

Blenheim Annual Pass Offer
Free admission to the Main Gallery for visitors with a current and valid Blenheim Annual Pass.
Please bring your Annual and/or Privilege Passes with you to take advantage of the free admission offer.

Please note: Our free entry offer for Blenheim Annual Pass holders does not include entry to the Lee Miller exhibition, but all other galleries are included. Blenheim Annual Pass Holders can purchase discounted tickets (£5) to enter the  Lee Miller: A Woman at War exhibition.

GoodJourney
Travel a greener way for discounts! Enjoy 2for1 standard entry when you show a train or bus ticket from the day of your visit. Find out more about getting here car-free at GoodJourney.
Getting Here
We're tucked away in Woodstock at the bottom of The Oxfordshire Museum's beautiful gardens, on the doorstep of Blenheim Palace's Woodstock Gate.
Where We Are

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum, Park Street, Woodstock, OX20 1SN

Where to Park

Woodstock's free, Long Stay Car Park is on Hensington Road, a 10 minute walk from the museum.

Sat Nav: OX20 1JQ

Blue Badge spaces and Pay and Display (1 - 5 hour) spaces can be found right outside the museum on Park Street

Buses & Trains

Buses:

S3 and S7 from Oxford City Centre

S7 from Witney

Nearest Train Stations:

Long Hanborough (bus S7)

Oxford (bus S3 or S7)

More Useful Info
Get A Gallery Map

Download (PDF)

Accessibility Guide

Download (PDF)

Our Customer Commitment

Download (PDF)

Need to get in touch?
Give Us A Ring

01993 810 210

Drop Us An Email

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Send A Letter

SOFO Office, Harrisons Lane, Woodstock, OX20 1SS

Keep in touch! Join our mailing list to stay up to date with SOFO news, events and exhibitions

Welcome Guides
Translated Guides to SOFO Museum (PDF)
Useful Links
More great stuff to see do in Woodstock and the surrounding area!

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions