Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
WEBSITE PRIVACY POLICY

This is the privacy policy for www.sofo.org.uk (the Site).  It explains what, how and why your personal data may be collected and used.  The Site is operated by SOLDIERS OF OXFORDSHIRE TRUST, a Charitable Incorporated Organisation (CIO). Our registered address is SOFO OFFICE, Harrison's Lane, Woodstock, Oxfordshire, OX20 1SS. Our charity commission registration number is 1145408.

SOFO is committed to protecting your privacy. At SOFO, we appreciate that you do not want the personal information we hold about you distributed indiscriminately and here we explain how we collect information, what we do with it and what controls you have.

What data do we collect?

We may collect the following information about you:

information (such as your name, email address, postal address and telephone number) you provide:
by completing forms on the Site, including if you register as a user of the Site, upload or submit any material via the Site, or request any information;
to our representatives via telephone, email, or personally in connection with marketing, promotion or sale of SOFO offerings, products and services;
communications you send to SOFO, for example to report a problem or to submit queries, concerns or comments regarding the Site or its content;
information from surveys that SOFO may, from time to time, run on the Site for research purposes, if you choose to respond to them;
details of your visits to the Site, the resources you access and any data you download; and employment details if you send us a CV, resumé or other details of your employment history in connection with an advertised job vacancy or a general enquiry regarding employment opportunities with SOFO; and
certain information obtained from our Site cookies described in our cookies policy (link here: www.sofo.org.uk/cookies-policy/ )

You are under no obligation to provide such information. However, if you should choose to withhold requested information, we may not be able to provide you with certain services.

How is the information used?

SOFO will process the personal information you provide for its legitimate business purposes, which include some or all of the following:

to process on-line product orders;
send you information we think you may find useful by email and by post, including information about our offerings, products and services, unless you have indicated that you object to being contacted for these purposes;
identify visitors to the Site, pages visited, duration of visits;
enable us to provide you with the services and information offered through the Site and which you request;
audit the downloading of data from the Site, to better understand how people interact with the Site;
improve the layout and/or content of our web pages and customise them for users; and
carry out research, to determine the effectiveness of our advertising and promotional campaigns.

If you object to us processing your data for the purposes mentioned above, you can exercise your rights to stop us doing so by contacting us using the link at the end of this privacy policy. Please bear in mind that if you do object this may affect our ability to carry on providing service to you.

You can also tell us not to contact you with information regarding our offerings, products and services, either at the point such information is collected on the Site (by checking or un-checking (as directed) the relevant box) or by following the unsubscribe instructions on any communications sent to you.

With whom is the information shared?

We may disclose aggregate statistics about visitors to the Site, customers and sales (location, device used, pages visited), in order to describe our services to prospective partners, advertisers and other reputable third parties and for other lawful purposes, but these statistics will include no personally identifying information. We use Google Analytics to track and measure traffic on the Site, to better understand customer behaviour, and improve customer experience.

SOFO may disclose personal information to any of its affiliates, or to its agents or contractors who assist us in providing the services we offer through the Site, processing and fulfilling requests for information, providing support services, receiving and sending communications and analysing data, or in other tasks, from time to time. For further details see below.

In the event that SOFO undergoes reorganisation or is sold to a third party, any personal information SOFO holds about you may be transferred to that reorganised entity or third party. However none of your personal information will be transferred to a third party prior to a sale or reorganisation completing.

SOFO may disclose personal information to the appropriate authorities, if required to do so by law or if it believes that such action is necessary to prevent fraud or cyber-crime or to protect and defend the rights, property or personal safety of SOFO, any of its affiliates, the Site or its visitors.

Where is your information stored?

Generally, information which you submit via the Site is sent to and stored in an encrypted form on a single server located in the United Kingdom. This is necessary in order to process the information. No access to this information is granted to the server.

Information submitted by you may be transferred by us to our other offices and/or to third parties in the circumstances mentioned in this privacy policy, which may be situated outside the European Economic Area.  In those circumstances we will not transfer your personal data unless we are satisfied that adequate mechanisms are in place.

How long will personal data be kept?

Personal data (identified above in this policy) of customers will be kept until a customer advises us they no longer wish to use our products or services, terminates any business relationship with us or requests that their information be deleted.

With respect to personal data of non-customers, we will hold this information until they request that their information is deleted, or they have been consistently unresponsive to our communications.  We will perform a periodic audit of the non-customer information held and assess whether our communications to such contacts is consistently yielding no responses, and should be deleted.

External links

The Site may, from time to time, contain links to external sites. SOFO is not responsible for the privacy policies or the content of such sites.

Security

SOFO places great importance on the security of all personally identifiable information associated with our users. We have security measures in place to attempt to protect against the loss, misuse and alteration of personal information under our control. For example, our security and privacy policies are periodically reviewed and enhanced as necessary and only authorised personnel have access to user information. While we cannot ensure or guarantee that loss, misuse or alteration of information will not occur, we use all reasonable efforts to prevent this.

You should bear in mind that transmission of information over the internet is never entirely secure. We cannot guarantee the security of information you transmit to the Site and any such transmission is at your own risk.

It is advisable to close your browser when you have finished your user session to help ensure others do not access your personal information if you use a shared computer or a computer in a public place.

Your rights

You have a right to:

access your personal data (including in electronic form);
the deletion or correction of, your personal data;
exercise control over how your personal data is being used:
request that your personal data is not shared with any third parties;
request that we cease processing your information for any of the purposes noted above; or
alter the frequency, subject matter or format of our communications with you.

You also have a right to report any breaches of your data protection rights to the Information Commissioners Office (website here: https://ico.org.uk/)

Please email any questions, concerns or comments you have about this privacy policy or any requests concerning your personal data to the museumdirector@sofo.org.uk.

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions