Home
Visit Us
Exhibitions
Events
Online Talks
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Collections
Blog
Research
Learning
Shop
Cart
My Account
About
Become a Friend
Support Us
Room Hire

01993 810 210

frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

  
Home
Events
Exhibitions
Collections
Friends’ Membership
Visit
Shop
Basket
My Account
Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects
Research
Learning
Online Talks
Blog
Support Us
Room Hire
Image Services
About
08
Mar
BYDUNCAN PARSONS// CONFLICT AND COUNTY: SOLDIERS OF OXFORDSHIRE, WW2
Women of the WAAF – Joan Woodruff

Our thanks to RAF Benson for providing this article and photographs.

Women of the WAAF: Joan Woodruff (née Heraghty)

Joan Heraghty was born on 4 November 1923 and originally came from Goldthorpe, a few miles away from Doncaster in South Yorkshire.

At eighteen years of age she decided to join the Woman’s Auxiliary Air Force. After her days of learning to march and learning about the Royal Air Force (square bashing) she was selected to be trained at the Royal Air Force Balloon Command Training Unit, where people were taught how to operate and repair barrage balloons.

Joan was selected to be a Winch Operator. This meant she was in command of the machine that let the balloon rise up from its trailer to the required height, and also bring it back down when required. She rose in rank from Aircraft Woman 2 (ACW2), through Aircraft Woman 1 (ACW1), to Leading Aircraft Woman (LACW).

LACW Joan Woodruff 544 Sqn

Though the exact date isn't known, at some stage in her career with Balloon Command she chose to change to an Aircraft Frame Mechanic. She evidently arrived at Royal Air Force Station Benson and was assigned to 542 (Spitfire) Squadron. Although her change of trade she became an ACW2 once again in this unit, she still kept her LACW rank within he rold one, so she could return to that trade if she chose to.

As a junior mechanic she was given tasks of checking tyre pressures, checking coolant and oil levels, as well as team member to push out the aircraft from the hangar after a servicing. Being in a hangar to do all these tasks would be a luxury in those days - in most cases these tasks were carried out on a daily basis outside, in pretty much all weathers.

A mechanic at the time would have a pretty tiring day as there were no vehicles available to drive the mechanics around the airfield, they either walked to each aircraft, or used a RAF supplied bicycle.

On 10 Septermber 1943 all the servicing work on each of the Squadrons was changed. Servicing crews from the Squadrons combined to become 8540 Service Echelon, and every mechanic and engineer worked on any and all the aircraft requiring service, regardless of which Squadron it came from.

Amongst the servicing crews was Leading Aircraftman Edward Cecil Woodruff, also a mechanic, who came to England from Canada having joined up on 29 August 1939.

Edward and Joan met while working together, and eventually got married in Mexborough in South Yorkshire.

Joan was transfered from 542 Squadron to 544 Squadron on 2 April 1945 and from then worked more closely on the Dehavilland Mosquito, a twin engine aircraft. She even had two flights in the Mosquito which she enjoyed very much.

When the war finished, both Joan and Edward stayed at Benson. Joan took the train to Wythall in the west midlands in August 1945 and arrived at RAF Wythall No. 105 Personel Dispatch Centre. There she was given civilan clothes ready for her to return to civilian life and returned to Wallingford, again by train, on 28th August 1945.

Her final discharge date from the RAF was 23 October 1945.

In her release book the brief statement of her service was written by Wing Commander J.R.H. Merfield:

 

A good trades woman who has given every satisfaction in her work.

She is keen and can be relied upon to give of her best at all times.

 

She left the United Kingdom with Edward, and set up a home and family in Canada.

 Tags: Benson, International Women's Day, Oxfordshire, RAF, RAF Benson, Royal Air Force, Second World War, WAAF, Women and War, Womens Auxiliary Air Force, Womens History, World War Two, WW2

Previous:
Women of the ATA – Freydis Mary Sharland
Next:
10 Years of SOFO: Join us for our Armed Forces Day Garden Party!
Related posts
OBJECT OF THE MONTH: EVACUEE’S COAT (OXFORDSHIRE’S MILITARY HERITAGE IN 50 OBJECTS)

Evacuee’s Coat from our Oxfordshire’s Military Heritage in 50 Objects Exhibition By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris Philip Williams’ woollen, fully-lined children’s coat would certainly have satisfied the requirement for evacuees to take with them a warm winter coat as they moved from their homes to safer locations elsewhere, often in the countryside. This smart, yet also sensible and practical design, very much reflected the type of coat…

OBJECT OF THE MONTH FEBRUARY 2026: SWEETHEART PIN CUSHION

February’s Object of the Month follows a Valentine’s Day theme! Volunteer Geraldine has selected a First World War pin cushion, shaped like a heart, it has quite a story behind it! Sweetheart Pin Cushion By Geraldine Howell Object photography by Colin Morris   This sweetheart pin cushion was made during the First World War by a member of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. Sweetheart cushions were not unknown before…

Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum
Park Street.
Woodstock
Oxfordshire OX20 1SN

Phone and Email:
General Enquiries & Event Tickets: 01993 810 211
frontofhouse@sofo.org.uk

Privacy Policy
Terms and conditions