Skip to content

IDEA

International Development Ethics Association

About
Officers Board
Bylaws
Past Events
 
Member Resources
Joining IDEA
IDEA 2018 ELECTIONS, JUNE 26-JULY 2

IDEA 2018 elections — Results (announced July 4, 2018)

Nigel Dower and Sandra Boni (Elections committee) declare the following results

All those who voted for office-bearing positions voted 100% for the following results:

President: Eric Palmer

Vice President: Lori Keleher

Secretary: Anna Malavisi

Treasurer: Mario Solis

 

Because there was a tie in the last position, 9 are elected to the Board (alphabetical order):

Morten Fibigier Biskov

Stephen L. Esquith

Rebecca Gutwald

Christine Koggel

Stacy Kosko

Laurent Parrot

Amandine Sabourin

Chloe Schwenke

Carlos Zorro-Sanchez

 

Addition as of August 22, 2018: Provisions of the IDEA bylaws direct the President to add members-at-large with approval of the seated Board. Members added are:

Jerome Ballet

Gurcan Koçan

Krushil Watene

Ndidi Nwaneri

Shashi Motilal

Lidia de Tienda Palop

Jack Simpson

 

***Historical information below*** 

Difficulties regarding access to the internet for some at the IDEA congress necessitate  longer voting schedule than originally planned: The elections committee reports, “we have decided to extend the voting window till Monday, July 2 at 6:00 pm (European Central Time).” Voting instructions to arrive by email.

If you believe that you are a member in good standing for 2018 and have not received such an email, please send by Monday July 2 at 6PM European Central Time an email, with votes you would wish to have registered, to n.dower@abdn.ac.uk and sandraboni@yahoo.es . Include as the address line ‘IDEA ballot — I believe I am a member’.

Candidates:

Eric Palmer nominee for President

Eric Palmer (PhD 1991, Philosophy, University of California, San Diego) is Professor of Philosophy at Allegheny College, in USA. His academic work has focused primarily in two areas: history and philosophy of science in European culture, and development ethics with foci on business activity and on the concept of development. He is current President of the International Development Ethics Association (2014-18) and is co-editor of IDEA’s affiliated journal, Journal of Global Ethics (2014-present). He has been co-director of a series of National Endowment for the Humanities Institutes focused upon development ethics.
It has been a privilege serving this organization, which I find to be so collegial and collaborative. For the future, of course I hope to shepherd another IDEA congress, this time in fewer than four years’ time. I hope to encourage other (perhaps smaller) topical conferences as well during that time. I hope to facilitate publishing efforts of others – especially book series and textbook options at first – in order to grow our field for the purpose of garnering further recognition of the philosophic perspective on development within university curricula and in policy circles. I think finding a place in policy discussions, in particular, is a realistic longer-term goal for this field. I would also wish to encourage further philosophical engagement with development practitioners, but I also have some sense of the limits of what I may be equipped and able to accomplish. So, I hope that others in the organization will supplement my lack, building in that area and in other areas of our shared work of development ethics.

Lori Keheler nominee for Vice President

Lori Keleher, PhD. (Philosophy) is an Associate Professor of Philosophy at New Mexico State University in Las Cruces, New Mexico (USA). She has served on the board of the International Development Ethics Association (IDEA) since 2005 and was active in organizing the Costa Rica conference (2014) and the Bordeaux conference (2018).

She was a faciliator of the Ethics and Development Thematic Group of the Human Development Capability Association (HDCA) from 2007 – 2016,and currently serves on the HDCA executive council and as an HDCA fellow. With Jay Drydyk she is the co-editor of the Routledge Handbook of Development Ethics (Francis and Taylor). With Stacy Kosko she is the co-editor of Agency, Democracy, and Participation in Global Development (Cambridge University Press). Her current research interests include concepts of human dignity, and integral human development. In addition to her academic experience, Lori worked for Development Alternatives Incorporated (DAI) in Washington, DC (2001 – 2003).

Mario Solís nominee for Treasurer

Professor and Director of the Graduate Program in Philosophy at the University of Costa Rica (UCR) where he teaches moral and political philosophy. He received his PhD at the University of Essex, UK. He has served as a visiting researcher at the Uppsala University, Sweden, and a Visiting Research Associate at UCL, London. His interests include global justice, human rights, and moral and political philosophy. He is the author of Justicia Situacional: Racionalidad, Normatividad y Teoría Crítica Latinoamericanista (Situational Justice: Rationality, Normativity and Latin American Critical Theory) (2016). He is a member of the International Development Ethics Association’s executive board; of the Research Committee of Instituto de Investigaciones Filosóficas, UCR; and of Asociación Latinoamerican de Filosofía Analítica.

Anna Malavisi nominee for Secretary

Assistant Professor in the Department of Philosophy & Humanistic Studies at Western Connecticut State University. She has a PhD in philosophy from Michigan State University. Her dissertation, Global development and its discontents: rethinking the theory and practice, is a critical analysis of global development from an ethical and feminist epistemology perspective. Her philosophical interests include: practical and global ethics, feminist philosophy/epistemology, social and political thought, environmental philosophy and the philosophy of violence. She has a Master of Health and International Development and has worked for 16 years in Latin America in the NGO sector in areas of development practice and management. Personal website: https://annamalavisi.com

Those are the 17 nominee for Official Board for 8 places

Morten Fibigier Biskov

Morten Fibieger Byskov is a Postdoctoral Researcher at the Department of Politics and International Studies, University of Warwick. Morten has been active in  the International Development Ethics Association since 2015 and the Human Development and Capability Association since 2012 where he is co-coordinator of the Foundational Issues in the Capability Approach (FICA) thematic group. He has presented his work at several international conferences and published extensively within the field of development ethics, including in his book The Capability Approach in Practice (Routledge 2018). Morten is co-founder (together with Rebecca Gutwald) of the European Development Ethics Network (EDEN) – a regional platform to foster collaboration between European development ethicists. His research interests are on the nexus between democracy and development and the question of how to include local stakeholders in decision-making on climate adaptation.

As a board member of IDEA, Morten will work on initiatives to create more visibility around the work of young scholars, especially from the Global South. A stated goal of IDEA is to have diversity and young scholars from around the world are at the forefront of  groundbreaking research on development ethics. Initiatives to create visibility around their work will be:

The establishment of a graduate network to connect and coordinate young scholars;
Plenary sessions organized by young scholars on topics, such as youth unemployment;
The creation of a permanent liaison for young scholars and the graduate network on the IDEA board.

 

James Crombie

James Crombie is currently interested in the Latin American Social Medicine movement and the effect of intellectual property rights on access to health care and the unequal allocation of medical research resources to problems of concern to the “majority world”. He teaches globalization ethics, biomedical ethics, business ethics, philosophy of science and philosophy of education at l’Université Sainte-Anne, a small francophone university in Nova Scotia, Canada. He has published on the unethical marketing of breast-milk substitutes in developing countries and on the transformation of the sense of identity among linguistic minorities with the advent of satellite tv and the Internet. James is also an accredited conference interpreter with knowledge of French and Spanish. Web: http://personnel.usainteanne.ca/jcrombie

 

Lydia De Tienda Palop

Currently, I am a “Juan de la Cierva” postdoctoral researcher of the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness in the Department of Philosophy at the University of Valencia. I have also been a postdoctoral researcher under the JSPS Program at the University of Hokkaido in the Department of Philosophy. I graduated in Law and Philosophy and hold a Ph. D in Philosophy after obtaininn a FPU Fellowship. I have conducted research stays in Oxford (OPHI, International Development Department) and Japan (Hokkaido University) working on the Capabilities Approach and given talks at conferences and seminars organized by the Universities of Capetown, Tübingen, Kyoto, Trento, Tokyo, Oxford, Complutense and Valencia among others, on topics related to human development, justice for specially vulnerable groups and the role of emotions in a theory of justice. My publications include “The role of emotions and literature in public deliberation” published in Arbor; “How to evaluate Justice?” In Applied Ethics, Old wines in new bottles ?; “Measuring Nussbaum’s Capabilities list” in The Capabilities Approach on Social Order; “The plural notion of the subject of justice” in Daimon or “The mission of the university today: an intercultural education” in El Ciudadano Democrático. In 2009 I was a member of the IDEAS’s Conference organizer committee on Ethics in Human Development and Global Justice: Responsibilities of Institutions and Citizens for actions on poverty”, 2-4 Diciembre, Valencia

 

Stephen L. Esquith

Stephen L. Esquith has been working on ethical problems in developing countries since 1990 when he was a senior Fulbright scholar in Poland. His research and teaching since that time has focused on democratic transitions in post-conflict situations. He is the author of Intimacy and Spectacle (Cornell, 1994), a critique of classical and modern liberal political philosophy, and The Political Responsibilities of Everyday Bystanders (Pennsylvania State University Press, 2010) on mass violence and democratic political education. He spent the academic year 2005-06 teaching and working with colleagues at the University of Bamako, Mali as a senior Fulbright scholar.  In  2006 he became Dean of the new Residential College in the Arts and Humanities. He  is currently working with colleagues in Mali on several related projects on post-conflict dialogue and reconciliation, including a new study abroad program on this topic in Mali beginning in summer 2014.

 

Fred Gifford

I would like to be considered for another term as an IDEA Board member.  I’m a philosopher at Michigan State University.  With background in health care ethics and philosophy of science, I came to development ethics through developing and teaching a study abroad program in Costa Rica.  I co-edited Capabilities, Power, and Institutions: Toward a More Critical Development Ethics with Steve Esquith.  I co-directed (with Eric Palmer) two National Endowment for Humanities Institutes on ethics and development (in the summers of 2013 and 2015) at Michigan State, and have been director of a graduate specialization in ethics and development there.  I’m particularly interested in issues in global health and heath care, and I took part in the Corruption in the Pharmaceutical Sector conference that arose from a panel that was originally to have taken place at the 2016 IDEA conference in Turkey.

 

Rebecca Gutwald

I am a philosopher at two universities in Munich, Germany. First, as an academic coordinator of a PhD-programme on global ethics, philosophy education and care at the Munich School of Philosophy, Germany, and second, as a post-doc researcher and teacher in philosophy at the University of Munich (LMU). I hold a PhD in philosophy and wrote my dissertation on the topic of cultural paternalism in development. After that, I have continued working at the University of Munich on issues of development ethics, political philosophy, the capability approach, feminism and the normative foundations of global justice.

Since 2014 I have chaired the Thematic Group “Foundational Issues in the Capability Approach” of the Human Development and Capability Association. Currently, I am in the process of establishing a European Network of Development Ethics, EDEN, the aim of which is to connect European researchers working in development ethics. My goal is to make development ethics more visible in Europe. I believe that if reflect on issues of development in Europe as Europeans and also on the role of Europe as a global player in development, we can contribute to the academic and public discussion on what development is and why it is relevant in many fields.

My aim for serving on the IDEA board is work towards establishing link to European perspectives and scholars via EDEN and promote the discussion between them and international researchers in IDEA.

David Hoekema

Former Executive Director of American Philosophical Association; current Publisher (President) of the journal Christian Scholar’s Review; former faculty member at University of Delaware and St. Olaf College (Minnesota, USA)

Having served one term on the IDEA board I wish to stand for election to a second term.  My research work has been focused on areas of political philosophy and applied philosophy, most recently in the context of African politics and development (my book “We Are the Voice of the Grass: Interfaith Peace Activism in Northern Uganda” Forthcoming in 2018 by Oxford University Press).  Having retired from full-time teaching in May 2018, I anticipate more active involvement in organizations such as IDEA and in other initiatives, especially in relation to religion and higher education in a variety of international contexts, in which I am already involved but for which I have until now had too little time.  I have taught seminars and classes or conducted research in the past decade in Ghana, Kenya, Uganda, the Netherlands, and China.  (In 2010 I served as a Fulbright teacher/researcher in Kenya, in 2016 I was a Visiting Scholar at the Rijksuniversiteit, Groningen, Netherlands, and I am currently a Visiting Scholar at the University of Arizona.) As a continuing board member I will seek to assist IDEA in strengthening its network in these regions

Mladjo Ivanovic

Dr. is a visiting professor at the Department of Philosophy at Grand Valley State University. He received his Ph.D. from Michigan State University with graduate specializations in Development Ethics and Environmental Ethics and Philosophy. Dr. Ivanovic’s research areas are  in sociopolitical theory and applied ethics, with a thematic focus on questions of (forceful) migration, humanitarianism, development ethics, and environmental justice. In addition to his academic background, Dr. Ivanovic has extensive management and consulting experience, working as a project manager and consultant for humanitarian nonprofit organizations in the United States and abroad.

I would like to be considered for a board member position in the IDEA. My focus on present global, moral, political and humanitarian challenges, as well as their many intersections with the social and environmental mechanisms of the human condition, suggests both theoretical and practical experience that could contribute to the academic environment at your association. In addition to my academic research and teaching, I believe that my practical experience in international development and work with humanitarian non-profit organizations aligns well with the criteria outlined for this position.

Christine Koggel

I have been a Board member since the IDEA conference in Uganda in 2006. I have been at all but one IDEA conference since then and I organized the 2011 IDEA conference at Bryn Mawr College, PA. It was the Ninth IDEA conference and had the theme “Gender Justice: Local and Global”, the first ever IDEA conference devoted to this theme. I edited a special issue for a journal that collected papers from that conference and that special issue has been reprinted as a book. What I bring to IDEA and will continue to bring is awareness of the relevance of gender and oppression more generally to development ethics. I have authored, edited, and co-edited numerous books, collections, and journal articles on topics in the areas of moral and political theory, practical ethics, feminism, relational theory, and development ethics.

10. Stacy Kosko

Dr. Stacy J. Kosko is an Assistant Research Professor, and Associate Director of the Minor in International Development and Conflict Management (MIDCM), in the Center for International Development and Conflict Management in the Department of Government and Politics at the University of Maryland (USA).  Dr. Kosko holds a PhD in Public Policy and development studies from the University of Maryland, an MS in Foreign Service and international conflict management from Georgetown University, with a certificate in Refugee and Humanitarian Emergencies, and a BA in English and French and BS in Film from Syracuse University.  She spent the 2017-2018 academic year as a Fulbright Scholar in Moldova where she organized the IDEA conference on Marginalized Peoples, Human Rights, and Development Ethics.  Her research focuses on development ethics, human rights, and severely marginalized populations.  She serves on the Executive Board of the International Development Ethics Association and has just been elected to the Executive Council of the Human Development and Capabilities Association.  Previously, she also served as the Associate Director of UMD’s College Park Scholars Public Leadership program, as the Deputy Director of The Advocacy Project, a Washington D.C.-based human rights organization, and as a consultant for the World Bank, for international charitable foundations, and for non-profit human rights organizations in the Czech Republic and Romania.

11. Marie-Pier Lemay

I am a second-year PhD student in Philosophy enrolled in the collaborative program with International Development Studies at the University of Guelph, Canada. In my research, I hope to explore the prospect of a transnational feminist solidarity, and advance an argument for what the requirements of such solidarity might be. My doctoral studies, situated are the intersection of the theory and practice of development, will lead me to lead interviews with feminist activists in Canada and Senegal. My research interest also include conceptual issues in the capability approaches (e.g. how to conceptualize collective and/or relational capabilities), intersectionality & critical race theory, and the non-ideal global justice literature.

While I do not have a significant experience in working with an international academic organization, I hope to learn from being a board member of IDEA. I am especially interested in being involved in the organization of the next conference and the review process related. I believe that it would be interesting for the organization to build a graduate student network, or at least a platform for sharing information.

12. Laurent Parrot

I am an economist. I currently work in France at the CIRAD, the French Agricultural Research Center for International Development). This agency is specialized in life sciences, social sciences and engineering sciences, applied to agriculture, the environment, and territorial management. There are about 1600 researchers, in France, but also in the tropics (about 250 researchers disseminated in all the continents). The CIRAD is highly dedicated to participatory approaches with its partners. The CIRAD operates in direct connection with other international agencies (IRD, INRA, Universities, etc.).

My current research focuses on analyzing the economic performance of the horticultural sectors in the French West Indies, Sub-Saharan Africa and the Indian Ocean; and how behavioral sciences can influence economic performance. My work on agro-ecological innovations, as well as the contribution of behavioral and cognitive sciences in medicine, have influenced my view of the economic agent, i.e., the person, his household, the firm, and the government. Economics is not just about logistics, profit, or even shaping individual choices, it is also about living conditions and capabilities. A person-centered development ethic can contribute to reflections on the ends and means of economics. I am currently exploring the Alliance Approach from a theoretical and operational perspective.

As a board member, I could contribute to strengthen the links between development ethics and other fields of disciplines agricultural sciences, food systems, and more broadly, sustainable development in southern countries. It could concern CIRAD but also the network of researchers involved in the challenge of food systems and sustainable development all based in Montpellier, France. I believe interdisciplinary alliances would be fruitful to develop, grounded both on theoretical but also practical issues concerning development ethics. I could contribute to international seminars, conferences, workshops, and training sessions. For example, the Agropolis Foundation (with other potential funding partners) in France could support an international inbound scientist partnership, and /or an international conference (in France).

13. Matt Regan

Matt Regan is a PhD candidate at the University of Maryland, School of Public Policy. His research interests include democracy and culture in Southeast Asia, the ethics of global development, environmental governance, and Buddhist ethics. In addition, Matt serves as a historian at the U.S. Department of State, where he conducts research in the history of foreign relations of the United States, including development policy. He previously spent two years at an international development implementing firm. He has been a member of IDEA since 2014.

14. Amandine Sabourin

Stacy Kosko says: It is my honor and delight to nominate Dr. Amandine Sabourin to the Executive Board of IDEA.  Amandine has spent the last two years as a professor of international relations at the Moldova State University while taking a short break from her career as a diplomat with the French Foreign Service, to which she returns this fall with a new post in Poland.  Her area of expertise is development institutions and aid mechanisms in the European context.  This past year, she and I co-organized the Chisinau IDEA conference on “Marginalized Peoples, Human Rights, and Development Ethics,” for which she worked nearly full-time for five months, taking the lead in fundraising and making contacts with the international community, both of which she did with ease and great success.  Amandine is amazingly organized, energetic, and knowledgeable.  She is open-hearted, sincere, and incredibly intelligent.  She has already served IDEA so well this past year and would make an outstanding addition to the Board moving forward.  It is my great pleasure to nominate her.

15. Chloe Schwenke

I have been active in IDEA since 2003, and I took a leadership role in organizing the IDEA Conference in Kampala, Uganda in 2006. Recently I was a keynote speaker and a panelist at the IDEA Conference in Chisinau, Moldova, and shortly thereafter I was a keynote speaker and a panelist at the IDEA-supported conference on development ethics at Okanagan College in Kelowna, British Columbia, Canada.

I currently serve as the Interim Executive Director of the Association of Writers & Writing Programs (AWP), based in College Park, Maryland. Prior to this assignment, I served in various senior positions as an international development practitioner, advocate, researcher, consultant, and academic. I have also been an adjunct professor of development ethics at the University of Massachusetts in Boston, and at the Johns Hopkins School for Advanced International Studies in Washington, DC. I remain active on the adjunct faculty at the McCourt School of Public Policy at Georgetown University, and at the School of Public Policy at the University of Maryland. I also serve on the International Programs Executive Committee of the American Friends Service Committee.

I have served as the research director of a global program on gender-based violence and social inclusion at the International Center for Research on Women, and earlier as vice president for global human rights programming at Freedom House. During the Obama Administration, I became the first ever openly transgender political appointee in the federal foreign affairs agencies, serving at USAID in the dual roles of Senior Advisor on Human Rights at the Africa Bureau, and Senior Advisor on LGBTQ issues globally. Throughout the last 20 years of my career, my focus has been on human dignity and human rights, gender equality, LGBTQ issues, and good governance.  My career includes over 15 years of living and working in the Global South, including the Gaza Strip, Kenya, Philippines, South Africa, and Uganda. All together I have carried out development project work in over 40 countries.

16. Jack Simpson

I’m a PhD student in the Polis department at Leeds, having completed an Ma in PPE at York. Alongside my academic work, I have led the online communication of the Human Development and Capability Association since 2015. Running the online communication has included organising existing platforms, around conferences and the building of a new website. The latter included sourcing, and project managing the design and web team that built the site. At conferences in Washington DC in 2015 & Tokyo 2016, I ran the social media and communication at conference, in Cape Town 2017 alongside online comms, I ran the administrative element of the HDCA at conference.

I have also worked on Leeds’ recent campaign to deepen the city’s cultural integration, during the bid to become European capital of culture. This work built on his experience across communication, ethical enquiry and entrepreneurialism. When not working on my PhD I run two businesses, both in the arts. With this work, I have ran hundreds of event and many projects around communication, worked with Unilever on ethical consumption and successful events to encourage voter registration.

My interest lays across communication and academia, it is in the intersection between the two that my interests are perhaps of most value to an organisation like IDEA. If I joined, I’d be interested in looking at existing communication and seeing if there was anything I had to offer in developing them.

17. Carlos Zorro-Sanchez

Associate Professor, University of los Andes, CIDER, Bogota, Colombia. He has a PhD in Social Sciences of Development from the University of Paris (EHESS); he has experience in social and economic development at national and local levels, as a practitioner as well as university professor. He has worked as a national and international consultant, as UNDP Chief Technical Advisor in Africa (Ivory Coast) and Central America (Nicaragua); as professor in Colombian universities and as guest fellow in French, Italian, Spanish, Brazilian and Ecuadorian universities. Main fields of study: Development Theory at global, national and local levels and Development Ethics; he has published numerous articles in national and international reviews.

 

 

 

 

 

Original plan, fyi (since revised by elections board):

IDEA has an elected Board of 8 members plus a further 8 members appointed by the IDEA President.

IDEA officers include Treasurer, Secretary, Vice-President, President.

To nominate yourself for Board membership or for an office, please send your self-nomination and statement (see next paragraph) to both members of the elections committee: Nigel Dower (Chair) and Sandra Boni, n.dower@abdn.ac.uk and sandraboni@yahoo.es . To nominate another, please send the nomination details to elections committee members, cc’ing the nominee in the email; elections committee members will then contact the individual to determine whether he or she wishes to stand as a candidate.

Those who wish to stand as nominees should indicate willingness to stand for a particular role (Board member, Treasurer, etc.) and provide a statement of up to 200 words indicating professional background, interests, and plans and initatives envisioned that may be relevant to IDEA. That statement is due to the two email addresses above by 11AM Bordeaux time June 26. The statement will be read or made available in print or online at the IDEA business meeting, noon Tuesday 26 June.

Nominations are now open and accepted by email, to close 11AM Bordeaux time Tuesday 26 June.
Nominations may also be accepted from the floor at the members’ meeting (lunch, 26 June). For nominations from the floor to be considered, an email to the elections committee members (see above) must arrive by 1:30 Tuesday 26 June.

 

A direct email will be sent to all registered members of IDEA by 5:00 PM Bordeaux time Tuesday June 26 requesting that members register their votes. If you believe that you are a member in good standing for 2018 and have not received such an email, please send by 8:30 AM Bordeaux time November 27 an email, with votes you would wish to have registered, to n.dower@abdn.ac.uk and sandraboni@yahoo.es . Include as the address line ‘IDEA ballot — I believe I am a member’. Elections committee members will also accept votes handed to them in written form up to that time. The elections committee will finally determine validity of membership as necessary by comparing submissions with membership rolls as verified by the Philosophy Documentation Center. Voting closes at 8:30AM Bordeaux time.

Such a schedule for elections has worked for IDEA in the past and reflects the process indicated in its bylaws (see elsewhere on the IDEA website), but if the elections process does not proceed smoothly within this short window, the elections committee will re-open the voting process in early July, or re-open nominations and voting process in early July.

Elected Board members and Officers should hold membership in IDEA.

Votes will be registered only from those who are members of IDEA.

Original plan, fyi (since revised by elections board):

 

Free Download: A comprehensive introduction to development ethics is now available online at no cost: Jay Drydyk & Lori Keleher, eds. The Routledge Handbook of Development Ethics. Routledge Press, 2018.

Contact: IDEA Secretary Jack Simpson, jh10j3s@leeds.ac.uk