Skip to content

IDEA

International Development Ethics Association

About
Officers Board
Bylaws
Past Events
 
Member Resources
Joining IDEA
JOINING IDEA
Membership is open to any individual who is in sympathy with IDEA’s approach to development issues.
Benefits of Membership Include:
One-year subscription, paper copy only, Journal of Global Ethics (saving of 66% from the regular subscription price for South and student members and 33% for others)
Email subscription to IDEA Occasional Newsletters (approximately 3 per year)
Eligibility to present at IDEA conferences
Solidarity with those holding common concern (priceless!)
2022 Membership Rates:

“South” Members (and all student, unemployed, or retired): USD 40

“North” Members (employed): USD 75

The IDEA Bylaws also afford a “contributing membership” status: those who are not in a position to pay dues may become contributing members with all the same rights as dues-paying members, though subscription to the Journal of Global Ethics cannot be included in this membership. If you wish to be considered as a contributing member, please email your request for inclusion to the organization’s secretary, Anna Malavisi, malavisi@msu.edu.

To Join IDEA:

Go to the Philosophy Documentation Center website at https://www.pdcnet.org/idea

Alternatively, you may send a cheque or money order in the appropriate US Dollar amount (see below for rates) to: Philosophy Documentation Center, PO Box 7147, Charlottesville VA 22906-7147, USA.

Please include a mailing address and an email address, and an indication of this notice, explaining that funds are intended for International Development Ethics Association Membership.

Are you already a member?

If you have been a member, you should at some point have received an email indicating IDEA membership from an email address that ends ‘@pdcnet.org’. To determine whether your membership is current, please search your email for a recent message from renew@pdcnet.org (following the link found there should tell you whether your membership is current). If details remain unclear, send an email to order@pdcnet.org with the subject line “Help with registering for International Development Ethics Association membership”. 

Free Download: A comprehensive introduction to development ethics is now available online at no cost: Jay Drydyk & Lori Keleher, eds. The Routledge Handbook of Development Ethics. Routledge Press, 2018.

Contact: IDEA Secretary Jack Simpson, jh10j3s@leeds.ac.uk