Skip to content

IDEA

International Development Ethics Association

About
Officers Board
Bylaws
Past Events
 
Member Resources
Joining IDEA
PRE-CONFERENCE WEBINAR 3: ÉTICA, DESARROLLO Y PAZ / ETHICS, DEVELOPMENT & PEACE IN MEDELLÍN, COLOMBIA

Full webinar schedule

English/Español sigue

The third of our planned sessions will focus on the recent history and current state of human and social development in Medellin, Colombia.

Since the signing of the 2016 peace agreement, Colombia’s second city has developed as a prosperous regional center with significant focus on development oriented toward the people. Panelists focused upon the significance of the city’s past and on justice in development within the region.

This webinar provides a view into the present political condition of Medellín. and so, of Colombia generally, providing insight in advance of the forthcoming Development in times of conflict conference.

Simultaneous translation will be provided.

En el próximo pre-seminario  de la Conferencia de Ética del Desarrollo abordaremos la pregunta por las visiones sobre el desarrollo en Medellín. ¿Los programas y proyectos de innovación de la ciudad han aportado a la superación de las situaciones de inequidad y vulneración de derechos fundamentales? ¿Existe en Medellín una apuesta de desarrollo con justicia y equidad? ¿Cómo se comprende el desarrollo desde la visión institucional, desde los sectores sociales y comunitarios y desde las comunidades de las periferias?

Estos son algunos de los interrogantes que abordaremos en el diálogo con representantes del sector institucional, académico y comunitario de la ciudad de Medellín.

Thursday August 5, 10:00 – 12:-00 Colombia time (GMT-5)

Jueves, 5 de Agosto de 2021 10h – 12h00 (GMT-5)

Moderator/Moderador:
Professor Juan Camilo Arias, researcher for the Master’s in Education and Human Rights at Universidade Autónoma Latinoamericana.  He is a historian, magister in political studies and doctor human and social sciences, Universidad Nacional de Colombia.

Discussants/Panelistas:

Oscar Manuel Cárdenas Avendaño, sociologist, master’s degree in Information Science with an emphasis on Memory and Society. University researcher. Member of Roots, a collective of historical memory and the process of Memory and Territorial Peace of the Northeast. 

Sonia Valle. Feminist under construction. Solidarity by conviction. Social worker. Master in Education and Human Rights.  Coordinator of the Gender Equity Centers – Medellín Women’s Secretariat.

Yuri Montoya Cardona works at the Museo Casa de la Memoria and she has done important work on memory and peacebuilding in Medellin.

Free Download: A comprehensive introduction to development ethics is now available online at no cost: Jay Drydyk & Lori Keleher, eds. The Routledge Handbook of Development Ethics. Routledge Press, 2018.

Contact: IDEA Secretary Jack Simpson, jh10j3s@leeds.ac.uk