Skip to content

IDEA

International Development Ethics Association

About
Officers Board
Bylaws
Past Events
 
Member Resources
Joining IDEA
READING LIST
General Readings in Global Development:
Addendum:

A comprehensive introduction to development ethics is now available online at no cost: Jay Drydyk & Lori Keleher, eds. The Routledge Handbook of Development Ethics. Routledge Press, 2018.

(The list below was composed in 2013 — obviously, updates are needed.)

Collier, Paul. 2008. The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Countries are Failing and What Can be Done about It. New York: Oxford University Press.
Crocker, David. 2008. Ethics of Global Development: Agency, Capability, and Deliberative Democracy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dower, Nigel. 2007. World Ethics: The New Agenda. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Dower, Nigel. 2003. An Introduction to Global Citizenship. New York: Routledge.
Drydyk, Jay., Chatterjee, Deen. 2011. “Development Ethics.” In Encyclopedia of Global Justice. New York: Springer.
Gasper, Des. 2004. The Ethics of Development. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Goulet, Denis. 1995.  Development Ethics: A Guide to Theory and Practice. New York: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Goulet, Denis. 1989. The Uncertain Promise: Value Conflicts in Technology Transfer. Apex Press.
Goulet, Denis. 1985. The Cruel Choice: A New Concept in the Theory of Development. New York: Atheneum.
Lera St. Clair, Asuncion and McNeill, Desmond. 2009. Global Poverty, Ethics, and Human Rights: The Role of Multilateral Organizations, New York and London: Routledge
Murithi, Tim. 2009. The Ethics of Peace building. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
Nussbaum, Martha. 2001. Women and Human Development: The Capabilities Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Penz, Peter., Drydyk, Jay., and Bose, Pablo. 2011. Displacement by Development: Ethics, Rights, and Responsibilities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pogge, Thomas. 2008. World, Poverty, and Human Rights. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Sachs, Jeffrey. 2006. The End of Poverty:Economic Possibilities for Our Time. New York: Penguin Books.
 Sen, Amartya. 2000. Development as Freedom. New York: Anchor.
Readings in Development and the Environment:
Harris, Paul. 2010. World Ethics and Climate Change:From International to Global Justice. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Lera St. Clair, Asuncion. et al. (eds.)2010. Climate Change, Ethics, and Human Security. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shrader-Frechette, Kristin. Environmental Justice: Creating Equality, Reclaiming Democracy (Environmental Ethics & Science Policy). New York: Routledge.
Thompson, Paul. 1992. The Ethics of Aid and Trade: US Food Policy, Foreign Competition, and the Social Contract. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Free Download: A comprehensive introduction to development ethics is now available online at no cost: Jay Drydyk & Lori Keleher, eds. The Routledge Handbook of Development Ethics. Routledge Press, 2018.

Contact: IDEA Secretary Jack Simpson, jh10j3s@leeds.ac.uk